---
layout: post
title: "Why working on artificial intelligence is good"
description: "There is no one who loves pain itself, who seeks after it and wants to have it, simply because it is pain..."
comments: true
keywords: "artificial intelligence, ethics, morality"
---

Assuming we have already established that what we ought to do is to do good, we might ask ourselves how we could possibly extract ourselves from working against bad. When something is bad, it is typically quite easy to see how it might be made good. On the contrary, things that are to produce good where there was nothing is hard to see, so much so that things that we imagine might be good often lead to more bad. Broadly speaking, the diametric positions on this spectrum are the natalist and the anti-natalist (also positive and negative utilitarianism). A contemporary example of this playing across the face of humanity lies in the falling into chaos of the West: the fear, terror and spiritual degradation that this chaos inspires switches an individual’s focus from the growth of good to the reduction of existing suffering. The violent protesters of the United States are not imagining space travel, artificial life, new cities or new congregations. Rather, they are fearfully focused on reducing their own immediate pain: reducing violence, reducing discrimination, reducing natural disaster, etc.

When two adults give birth to a child, it is not indisputably clear that they are doing good. Yet, most parents will tell you that their child is good, and that they feel they are doing good in the world by having their child. This is because the child has the potential to do good. Of course, they also have the potential to do great evil. But the parents, with the intention to do good in the world themselves, are convinced of the greater probability of goodness, and this is a goodness that they alone could not produce by themselves otherwise (not only for their limited lifespan, but for their limited potential to learn). The goodness is somewhat unbounded in this way. And as more people have more children, this potential compounds. In the first half of the twentieth century, we can see how this compounding manifests when evil in valence. Presently, to be a natalist is to reject this memory and continue forth with faith in the overwhelming likelihood of goodness.

While there is a strong negative utilitarian case for artificial intelligence (i.e. case for the reduction of suffering), I believe that artificial life is also like giving birth to a child. It is not possible to know for certain what this new life will do, however, if one has faith in the overwhelming goodness of life in itself, then its creation, if done with goodness of spirit, is a good thing that is worth pursuing.
